<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE book PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.2//EN" "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.2/docbookx.dtd">

<book lang="en">
<bookinfo>
    <title>Universal JTAG library, server and tools</title>
    <date>2010-02-16</date>
    <author>
        <firstname>Kolja</firstname>
        <othername>Waschk</othername>
        <surname>(Ed.)</surname>
    </author>
    <authorinitials>KW(</authorinitials>

<revhistory><revision><revnumber>1778</revnumber><date>2010-02-16</date><authorinitials>KW(</authorinitials></revision></revhistory>

</bookinfo>
<chapter id="_copyright">
<title>Copyright</title>
<simpara>Copyright 2007, 2008 Kolja Waschk and the respective authors.</simpara>

<simpara>Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the
terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or any later version
published by the Free Software Foundation. A copy of the license is included in
the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".</simpara>

</chapter>
<chapter id="_general">
<title>General</title>
<section id="_jtag">
<title>JTAG</title>
<simpara>JTAG basics can be found all over the Internet. This section should go into
some more details about working with JTAG. What hardware do you need, what is
the usage of JTAG, where do I get files. What file formats are available&#8230;</simpara>

<section id="_introduction">
<title>Introduction</title>
<simpara>JTAG (IEEE 1149.1) is a serial interface for testing devices with
integrated circuits. The problem that the JTAG interface was designed to solve
is checking if connections between ICs are OK. Therefore you can set and check
in- and outputs of ICs. In order to save pins and logic a very simple serial
design was invented.</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
One pin serial input
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
One pin serial output
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
One pin clock
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
One pin control
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>The control pin (together with clock) allows to switch device states. A state
machine inside each chip can be controlled, e.g. to reset the device.  This
control machine also allows to have two internal shift registers in each device
(although we only have on in- and one output-pin). The registers are called
instruction register (IR) and data register (DR).  The current UrJTAG tool
allows you to set the IR and set and get the DR. It doesn't allow you to
directly control the state machine (yet).</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_interfaces">
<title>Interfaces</title>
<simpara>The simplest interface that you can build is like the Xilinx parallel cable
(also called DLC5). If your device works with a 5V or 3.3V supply voltage then
this device can even be built just with passive parts.  (picture missing here)
UrJTAG also supports a number of other interface adapters.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_additions">
<title>Additions</title>
<simpara>In the meantime the JTAG specification was used as a basis for programming
flash files and debugging processors.  UrJTAG supports programming a couple of
different flash devices. It also supports programming of non-flash devices via
SVF files.  UrJTAG does not support debugging yet. Other open source solutions
such as OpenOCD allow you to debug ARM processors with gdb.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_bsdl_and_urjtag_data_files">
<title>BSDL and UrJTAG data files</title>
<simpara>The BSDL file format describes the JTAG interface for one IC.  It is a VHDL
syntax with the needed information (like pin-names, register lengths and
commands) that is usually created by the supplier. e.g. Xilinx BSDL files are
all included in their free web-pack (using file extension ".bsd").</simpara>

<simpara>UrJTAG uses a different file format internally. So in order to add a new device
to UrJTAG you need to convert those files and produce a directory structure.
Currently there are at least three tools available to do that; included with
UrJTAG is "bsdl2jtag". Please ask on the mailing list in case of problems with
that. Please also send proven working files back to this project.</simpara>

<simpara>Starting with post-0.7 releases, UrJTAG contains a BSDL subsystem that
retrieves the descriptions for chips in the chain from BSDL files on the
fly. "bsdl2jtag" is in fact a wrapper that uses the BSDL subsystem to
convert the BSDL file.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_svf_files">
<title>SVF files</title>
<simpara>The SVF file format contains a number of high level commands to drive the JTAG
bus. For example you can shift the IR or DR and even check for the results.
The Xilinx Impact and Altera QuartusII tools allow you to write this file to
program devices.</simpara>

<simpara>The player has been developed according to the "Serial Vector Format
Specification", Revision E, 8 March 1999 issued by ASSET InterTech, Inc. The
full specification can be found at
<ulink url="http://www.asset-intertech.com/support/svf.pdf">http://www.asset-intertech.com/support/svf.pdf</ulink>.</simpara>

<simpara>UrJTAG features an "SVF player" that can read SVF files and perform the
described actions on the bus.</simpara>

<simpara>SVF parser and lexer are also copyright 2002, CDS at <ulink url="http://www-csd.ijs.si/">http://www-csd.ijs.si/</ulink>.
They have been reused from the "Experimental Boundary Scan" project at
<ulink url="http://ebsp.sourceforge.net/">http://ebsp.sourceforge.net/</ulink>.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_jam_stapl_files">
<title>JAM/STAPL files</title>
<simpara>Another format for describing actions over JTAG interfaces is STAPL, actually
standardized as JEDEC "JESD-71A". Compared to SVF, it looks more like an
actual programming language and features looping, conditional execution, and
more. STAPL is not yet supported by UrJTAG.</simpara>

</section>
</section>
<section id="_urjtag">
<title>UrJTAG</title>
<section id="_introduction_2">
<title>Introduction</title>
<simpara>UrJTAG is a software package which enables working with JTAG-aware (IEEE
1149.1) hardware devices (parts) and boards through a JTAG adapter.</simpara>

<simpara>This package has an open and modular architecture with the ability to write
miscellaneous extensions (like board testers, flash memory programmers, and so
on).</simpara>

<simpara>UrJTAG is free software, covered by the GNU General Public License,
and you are welcome to change it and/or distribute copies of it under certain
conditions. There is absolutely no warranty for UrJTAG.  Please read
the COPYING file for more info.</simpara>

<warning><simpara>This software may damage your hardware!</simpara></warning>
<simpara>Feedback and contributions are welcome.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_about_this_document">
<title>About this document</title>
<simpara>This documentation is far from being complete. You're encouraged to amend and
supplement it and submit your changes in the Bugs or Enhancements tracker
at the UrJTAG website.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_urjtag_website">
<title>UrJTAG Website</title>
<simpara>The most current version of this documentation and UrJTAG source code
is always available from the project homepage at <ulink url="http://www.urjtag.org">http://www.urjtag.org</ulink>.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_the_name_urjtag">
<title>The name "UrJTAG"</title>
<simpara>I (Kolja) favour short names, so I thought about adding only a few
letters to "JTAG". The prefix "Ur" in German means "ancestral", an "Ur-Vater"
is a forefather. UrJTAG shall become the forefather, the prototype for many
other JTAG tools. By mere chance the "Ur" is also another name for an aurochs,
an animal similar to the GNU&#8230;</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_authors_contributors_8230_thanks">
<title>Authors, contributors, &#8230; thanks</title>
<simpara>A list of contributors is maintained in the file THANKS in the source
distribution. Special thanks go to Marcel Telka, who actually "invented" the
JTAG tools and wrote most of this basis of UrJTAG, and Arnim Laeuger for his
continuous support and development of SVF and BSDL subsystem and FT2232
drivers.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_urjtag_and_openwince_jtag_tools">
<title>UrJTAG and openwince JTAG Tools</title>
<simpara>The JTAG Tools originally were developed by Marcel Telka as part of
the openwince project. Still a large portion of the source code is his work.
However, the last release of the JTAG tools was version 0.5.1 in 2003. After a
few years the development completely stalled. Every few months or so on the
project's mailing list someone asked about continuing, but a critical mass
wasn't reached before late 2007. A fork of the JTAG tools was created under the
wings of the UrJTAG project at Sourceforge.</simpara>

</section>
</section>
<section id="_system_requirements">
<title>System requirements</title>
<section id="_supported_host_operating_systems">
<title>Supported host operating systems</title>
<simpara>JTAG Tools should run on all Unix like operating systems including MS Windows
with Cygwin installed. A precompiled version that runs on MS Windows without
Cygwin is available as a Windows installer executable.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_required_software_for_running_urjtag">
<title>Required software for running UrJTAG</title>
<simpara>Required only for MS Windows, unless you use the precompiled version:</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
current Cygwin net installation from <ulink url="http://cygwin.com">http://cygwin.com</ulink>
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
ioperm package (a part of the standard Cygwin net installation)
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>It may be necessary to run the command "ioperm -i" to install the IOPERM.SYS
driver in the system.</simpara>

<simpara>If UrJTAG was compiled to use the readline library, it has to be present on
the system as well. It's probably a standard part of your distribution.</simpara>

<simpara>More software is needed if you want to compile UrJTAG (which you probably want
because currently no pre-compiled binaries are available&#8230;).
See "Installation" below.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_supported_jtag_adapters_cables">
<title>Supported JTAG adapters/cables</title>
<simpara>See <emphasis>help cable</emphasis> command for up-to-date info.</simpara>

<simpara>Parallel-port cables:</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Arcom JTAG Cable
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Altera ByteBlaster/ByteBlaster II/ByteBlasterMV Parallel Port Download Cable
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Xilinx DLC5 JTAG Parallel Cable III
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
ETC EA253 JTAG Cable
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
ETC EI012 JTAG Cable
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Ka-Ro TRITON (PXA255/250) JTAG Cable
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Keith &amp;amp; Koep JTAG Cable
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Lattice Parallel Port JTAG Cable
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Mpcbdm JTAG Cable
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Macraigor Wiggler JTAG Cable
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>FT2232-based USB cables:</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Amontec JTAGkey
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Amontec JTAGkey-Tiny (supported as cable "JTAGkey")
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
KrisTech UsbScarab2 ARM JTAG <ulink url="http://www.kristech.eu/">http://www.kristech.eu/</ulink>
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Olimex ARM-USB-JTAG
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Olimex ARM-USB-TINY
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
OOCDLink-s (experimental) <ulink url="http://www.joernonline.de/dw/doku.php?id=projects:oocdlink:2_oocdlinks">http://www.joernonline.de/dw/doku.php?id=projects:oocdlink:2_oocdlinks</ulink>
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Other FT2232-based USB JTAG cables (experimental)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
TinCanTools Flyswatter
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Turtelizer 2 (experimental) <ulink url="http://www.ethernut.de/en/hardware/turtelizer/">http://www.ethernut.de/en/hardware/turtelizer/</ulink>
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
USB to JTAG Interface (experimental)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
<ulink url="http://www.hs-augsburg.de/~hhoegl/proj/usbjtag/usbjtag.html">http://www.hs-augsburg.de/~hhoegl/proj/usbjtag/usbjtag.html</ulink>
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Blackfin gnICE <ulink url="http://docs.blackfin.uclinux.org/doku.php?id=hw:jtag:gnice">http://docs.blackfin.uclinux.org/doku.php?id=hw:jtag:gnice</ulink>
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Blackfin gnICE+ <ulink url="http://docs.blackfin.uclinux.org/doku.php?id=hw:jtag:gnice-plus">http://docs.blackfin.uclinux.org/doku.php?id=hw:jtag:gnice-plus</ulink>
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Xverve Signalyzer Tool (experimental)
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>Other USB cables:</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Altera USB-Blaster and compatible <ulink url="http://www.ixo.de/info/usb_jtag">http://www.ixo.de/info/usb_jtag</ulink>
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Segger/IAR J-Link / Atmel SAM-ICE (experimental, work in progress)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Xilinx Platform USB Cable / DLC9 (slow, experimental, work in progress - don't use)
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>Other cables:</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Technologic Systems TS-7800 SoC GPIO builtin JTAG interface
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>
<section id="_jtag_aware_parts_chips">
<title>JTAG-aware parts (chips)</title>
<simpara>The data/ directory of the UrJTAG installation has some more, but at
least the following are supported:</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Altera EP1C20F400
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Altera MAX7000 (w/ BSDL)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Altera EPM7128AETC100
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Altera Cyclone I &amp; II (w/ BSDL)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Analog Devices Blackfin (w/ BSDL)
</simpara>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
BF504/BF506
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
BF512/BF514/BF516/BF518
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
BF522/BF523/BF524/BF525/BF526/BF527
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
BF531/BF532/BF533
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
BF538/BF539
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
BF534/BF536/BF537
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
BF542/BF544/BF547/BF548/BF549
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
BF561
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
BF592
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Analog Devices Sharc-21065L
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Atmel ATmega128 (partial support)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Atmel AT32AP7000 (partial support)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Broadcom BCM1250
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Broadcom BCM3310 (partial support)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Broadcom BCM5421S
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Broadcom BCM4712 (partial support)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
DEC SA1100
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Hitachi HD64465
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Hitachi SH7727
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Hitachi SH7729
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
IBM PowerPC 440GX
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Intel IXP425
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Intel SA1110
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Intel PXA250/PXA255/PXA260/PXA261/PXA262/PXA263
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Lattice LC4032V
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Lattice M4A3-64/32
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Lattice M4A3-256/192
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Motorola MPC8245
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Samsung S3C4510B
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Sharp LH7A400
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Toshiba TX4925/TX4926
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Xilinx XC2C256-TQ144
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Xilinx XCR3032XL-VQ44
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Xilinx XCR3128XL-CS144
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Xilinx XCR3128XL-VQ100
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Xilinx XCR3256XL-FT256
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Xilinx Spartan-IIE
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Xilinx Spartan-3/E
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Xilinx Spartan-3AN
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>
<section id="_flash_chips">
<title>Flash chips</title>
<note><simpara>Not all chips are supported in every possible configuration, there may
be untested combinations of chip type, bus width, &#8230;</simpara></note>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Intel 28FxxxJ3A (28F320J3A, 28F640J3A, 28F128J3A)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Intel 28FxxxK3 (28F640K3, 28F128K3, 28F256K3)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Intel 28FxxxK18 (28F640K18, 28F128K18, 28F256K18)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
AMD Am29LV64xD (Am29LV640D, Am29LV641D, Am29LV642D)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
AMD Am29xx040B (Am29F040B, Am29LV040B)
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>UrJTAG uses the multi-byte write mode if supported by the particular flash
device. The flash code will automatically switch to this algorithm if the
Device Geometry Definition reports that more than one memory location can be
written in a single step (refer to CFI details shown by <emphasis>detectflash</emphasis>). Since
multiple locations are written in a burst-like manner with only one polling
sequence afterwards, the overall flashing performance increases by factor of
5-17.</simpara>

<simpara>In case you encounter any issues with the multi-byte write mode, run configure
with the <emphasis>&#8212;disable-flash-multi-byte</emphasis> option and re-compile to disable this
algorithm.</simpara>

</section>
</section>
<section id="_compilation_and_installation">
<title>Compilation and installation</title>
<section id="_installation_of_precompiled_urjtag_for_windows">
<title>Installation of precompiled UrJTAG for Windows</title>
<simpara>By simply running UrJTAG-xxx.exe, the executable and data files will
be installed in your Windows program folder, usually some place like
C:\Program Files\UrJTAG. It comes ready with support for JTAG cables that are
directly attached to a parallel port. However, if you work with Windows Vista
and want access to the parallel port, a driver for it has to be installed
separately. It is available from</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">http://www.highrez.co.uk/Downloads/InpOut32/</literallayout>
<simpara>If you want to use UrJTAG with a JTAG cable attached to the USB port,
actual cable drivers have to be installed beside UrJTAG itself. Usually,
the cable vendor will provide the drivers. For example, drivers for
Altera USB-Blaster come with their Quartus software. For FTDI-based
cables, you need an INF file describing the cable and FTDIBUS.SYS and
FTD2XX.DLL from FTDI (CDM drivers). If your cable shows up in the device
manager without any warning sign, UrJTAG probably is able to talk to it.</simpara>

<simpara>Finally, UrJTAG additionally needs libusb-win32 to talk to some USB cables that
are not based on FTDI chips (Xilinx Platform Cable USB, Segger J-Link). The
so-called libusb-win32 filter driver is available from the project's download
page at Sourceforge:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">http://libusb-win32.sourceforge.net/#downloads</literallayout>
</section>
<section id="_required_software_for_compiling_urjtag">
<title>Required software for compiling UrJTAG</title>
<simpara>To run autogen.sh, you need autoconf and automake, bison, and a recent flex.</simpara>

<simpara>The distributed source tarball contains source pregenerated with a current
flex version; flex therefore is only needed if you want to compile code
checked out from our Subversion repository.  Flex 2.5.4a as it comes with
most but the very latest Cygwin release cannot build the scanners for BSDL and
SVF. Building these files requires Flex 2.5.33 or newer. The configure script
will compare the available Flex version against these preconditions and enables
or disables the related features.</simpara>

<simpara>Furthermore, libtool should be available, and "devel" versions of the following
packages:</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
gettext
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
readline (not needed, but really eases interactive use)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
ioperm (needed only for Cygwin)
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>
<section id="_required_libraries_for_usb_support">
<title>Required libraries for USB support</title>
<simpara>For USB adapter support (including support for parallel port adapters attached
to USB-to-parallel converters), one or more additional libraries are required.</simpara>

<simpara>Many USB JTAG adapters and USB-to-parallel converters are based on chips
made by FTDI. To support these, either intra.net's "libftdi" or FTDI's
"FTD2XX" library can be used.</simpara>

<simpara>On many modern Linux distributions, libftdi is available as a precompiled
package and can be installed using the distribution's package management system
(e.g. "apt-get libftdi-dev" for Debian and Ubuntu). If it isn't available or
you don't run Linux, you can get it from</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
<ulink url="http://www.intra2net.com/en/developer/libftdi/">http://www.intra2net.com/en/developer/libftdi/</ulink>
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>Alternatively, you can use the FTD2XX library from the chip manufacturer FTDI.
It is available for Linux and Windows. There's more information about linking
to that library in a Cygwin environment below.</simpara>

<simpara>All other USB JTAG adapters can be supported only if libusb is installed.
There is a libusb-win32 variant that can be used in a Cygwin environment:</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
<ulink url="http://libusb.sourceforge.net">http://libusb.sourceforge.net</ulink> (libusb)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
<ulink url="http://libusb-win32.sourceforge.net">http://libusb-win32.sourceforge.net</ulink> (libusb for Windows)
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>For specific notes regarding the use of these libraries in a Cygwin
environment, see below.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_installing_from_source_tar_gz">
<title>Installing from source tar.gz</title>
<simpara>The installation follows the standard configure, make, make install scheme:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">tar xzvf urjtag-x.y.tar.gz
cd urjtag-x.y
./configure
make
make install</literallayout>
</section>
<section id="_installing_from_subversion_repository">
<title>Installing from Subversion repository</title>
<simpara>If you want to try the very newest version of UrJTAG&#8230;</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">svn co http://urjtag.svn.sourceforge.net/svnroot/urjtag/trunk urjtag</literallayout>
<literallayout class="monospaced">cd urjtag/jtag
./autogen.sh
# ./configure done by autogen.sh; run it here with special options if needed
make
make install</literallayout>
</section>
<section id="_linking_to_ftd2xx_dll_in_cygwin_environment">
<title>Linking to FTD2XX.DLL in Cygwin environment</title>
<simpara>Before running configure, get the D2XX drivers from FTDI.</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
<ulink url="http://www.ftdichip.com/Drivers/D2XX.htm">http://www.ftdichip.com/Drivers/D2XX.htm</ulink> (FTDI FTD2XX library)
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>Unzip the archive into a directory of your choice (probably a choice
without spaces in the name is better) and afterwards run configure with the
"&#8212;with-ftd2xx" pointing to that directory, e.g.</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">./configure --with-ftd2xx="/cygdrive/c/temp/ftdi-cdm-drivers"</literallayout>
<simpara>Configure should now report</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag is now configured for
  ...
  Detected libftd2xx   : yes</literallayout>
</section>
<section id="_using_libusb_win32_in_cygwin_environment">
<title>Using LibUSB-Win32 in Cygwin environment</title>
<simpara>Before running configure, install the LibUSB-Win32 "filter" driver from SF.</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
<ulink url="http://libusb-win32.sourceforge.net">http://libusb-win32.sourceforge.net</ulink>
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>Then point configure to the directory where LibUSB-Win32 was installed (it
might give problems if the path contains spaces, as "Program Files" does!):</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">./configure --with-libusb="/cygdrive/c/Programme/LibUSB-Win32/"</literallayout>
</section>
<section id="_compiling_with_mingw">
<title>Compiling with MinGW</title>
<simpara>UrJTAG may be compiled into a Windows executable using the MinGW compiler
(<ulink url="http://www.mingw.org">http://www.mingw.org</ulink>), or Cygwin GCC with the "-mno-cygwin" compiler flag.</simpara>

<simpara>This has the advantage over running in a Cygwin environment that you don't need
to install anything else but the jtag.exe (plus libraries like FTD2XX.dll or
InpOut32.DLL that are required for device access under Windows in any case).</simpara>

<simpara>However, because support for MinGW is quite new in UrJTAG, it may lack some
features (e.g. readline support) or run a little slower.</simpara>

<simpara>Because it seems to be easier to set up a Cygwin environment, we recommend
using the Cygwin GCC with "-mno-cygwin" flag instead of using a MinGW setup:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">CFLAGS="-mno-cygwin -O2" ./configure --with-ftd2xx=/tmp/cdm-drivers --with-inpout32</literallayout>
<simpara>It is even possible to cross-compile and build the executable on a Linux
host:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">./configure --host=i586-mingw32msvc --with-ftd2xx=/tmp/cdm-drivers --with-inpout32
make</literallayout>
<simpara>The "&#8212;with-inpout32" switch tells UrJTAG to use the InpOut32.DLL for access to
parallel ports, because the Cygwin ioperm isn't available for MinGW. The InpOut32
library is available from logix4u.net:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">http://logix4u.net/Legacy_Ports/Parallel_Port/Inpout32.dll_for_Windows_98/2000/NT/XP.html</literallayout>
<simpara>An version updated to work in Windows Vista and 64 bit Windows is available from highrez:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">http://www.highrez.co.uk/Downloads/InpOut32/</literallayout>
</section>
<section id="_driver_tailoring">
<title>Driver tailoring</title>
<simpara>The configure script enables all default bus, cable and lowlevel drivers. You
can include and exclude specific drivers if required. For a list of parameters
run</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">./configure --help</literallayout>
<simpara>to figure out the appropriate &#8212;enable-bus, &#8212;enable-cable, and &#8212;enable-lowlevel
options.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_building_the_bsdl_subsystem">
<title>Building the BSDL subsystem</title>
<simpara>As mentioned above, building the BSDL lexer requires Flex 2.5.33 or newer. If
the detected Flex version is not recent enough, configure will disable the
BSDL subsystem. The detection result is summarized at the end of configure:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag is now configured for
  ...
  Build BSDL subsystem : yes</literallayout>
<simpara>Flex is only required when you're working on a check-out of the Subversion
repository. In this case Flex has to be called to transform bsdl_flex.l to
bsdl_flex.c. When you're compiling from released sources, the local Flex
version is not relevant since the output file of Flex is part of the
tarball. I.e. even if the local Flex fails the check, the BSDL subsystem is
enabled and will be compiled from the released C files.</simpara>

</section>
</section>
</chapter>
<chapter id="_usage">
<title>Usage</title>
<section id="_quick_start">
<title>Quick start</title>
<section id="_run_the_software">
<title>Run the software</title>
<simpara>Connect your JTAG adapter between your PC and target device and turn
on your device.</simpara>

<simpara>To run UrJTAG type "jtag" and press Enter; jtag should start and
display some initial information. Output should end with a line like this:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">WARNING: UrJTAG may damage your hardware!
Type "quit" to exit, "help" for help.</literallayout>
</section>
<section id="_configure_the_cable">
<title>Configure the cable</title>
<simpara>Type "help cable" for a list of supported JTAG cables.</simpara>

<simpara>Type the "cable" command followed by the cable name and possibly further
arguments for cable configuration. Example:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; cable EA253 parallel 0x378
Initializing ETC EA253 JTAG Cable on parallel port at 0x378</literallayout>
<simpara>See the section about the "cable" command for details and USB support.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_detect_parts_on_the_jtag_chain">
<title>Detect parts on the JTAG chain</title>
<simpara>Type "detect" at the jtag command prompt:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; detect</literallayout>
<simpara>Your output should look like this:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">IR length: 5
Chain length: 1
Device Id: 01011001001001100100000000010011
  Manufacturer: Intel
  Part:         PXA250
  Stepping:     C0
  Filename:     /usr/local/share/urjtag/intel/pxa250/pxa250c0</literallayout>
<simpara>If you get empty output or an error message your JTAG adapter is not connected
properly, or your target board doesn't work, or it is turned off.</simpara>

<simpara>The "detect" command is required before all other commands.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_print_current_jtag_chain_status">
<title>Print current JTAG chain status</title>
<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; print chain
 No. Manufacturer Part   Stepping Instruction Register
---------------------------------------------------------
   0 Intel        PXA250 C0       BYPASS      BR</literallayout>
</section>
<section id="_sample_device_pin_status">
<title>Sample device pin status</title>
<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; instruction SAMPLE/PRELOAD
jtag&gt; shift ir
jtag&gt; shift dr
jtag&gt; dr
1000110010000010000110010111111111111111111001101110...
jtag&gt; print chain
 No. Manufacturer Part   Stepping Instruction    Register
------------------------------------------------------------
   0 Intel        PXA250 C0       SAMPLE/PRELOAD BSR
jtag&gt; get signal BOOT_SEL[0]
BOOT_SEL[0] = 0
jtag&gt;</literallayout>
<literallayout class="monospaced">Note: BSR is "Boundary Scan Register"</literallayout>
</section>
<section id="_burn_flash_connected_to_the_part">
<title>Burn flash connected to the part</title>
<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; flashmem 0 brux.b
0x00000000
Note: Supported configuration is 2 x 16 bit only
BOOT_SEL: Asynchronous 32-bit ROM</literallayout>
<literallayout class="monospaced">2 x 16 bit CFI devices detected (QRY ok)!</literallayout>
<literallayout class="monospaced">program:
block 0 unlocked
erasing block 0: 0
addr: 0x00002854
verify:
addr: 0x00002854
Done.
jtag&gt;</literallayout>
<simpara>or:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; flashmem msbin xboot.bin
Note: Supported configuration is 2 x 16 bit only
BOOT_SEL: Asynchronous 32-bit ROM</literallayout>
<literallayout class="monospaced">2 x 16 bit CFI devices detected (QRY ok)!</literallayout>
<literallayout class="monospaced">block 0 unlocked
erasing block 0: 0
program:
record: start = 0x00000000, len = 0x00000004, checksum = 0x000001EB
record: start = 0x00000040, len = 0x00000008, checksum = 0x000001B0
record: start = 0x00001000, len = 0x00002B30, checksum = 0x00122CAB
record: start = 0x00004000, len = 0x00000160, checksum = 0x0000684B
record: start = 0x00005000, len = 0x00000054, checksum = 0x000008EE
record: start = 0x00005054, len = 0x00000030, checksum = 0x00000DA9
record: start = 0x00000000, len = 0x00001000, checksum = 0x00000000</literallayout>
<literallayout class="monospaced">verify:
record: start = 0x00000000, len = 0x00000004, checksum = 0x000001EB
record: start = 0x00000040, len = 0x00000008, checksum = 0x000001B0
record: start = 0x00001000, len = 0x00002B30, checksum = 0x00122CAB
record: start = 0x00004000, len = 0x00000160, checksum = 0x0000684B
record: start = 0x00005000, len = 0x00000054, checksum = 0x000008EE
record: start = 0x00005054, len = 0x00000030, checksum = 0x00000DA9
record: start = 0x00000000, len = 0x00001000, checksum = 0x00000000</literallayout>
<literallayout class="monospaced">Done.
jtag&gt;</literallayout>
</section>
<section id="_non_standard_flash_commands">
<title>Non-standard flash commands</title>
<simpara>Erasing and programming flash devices is covered by standard procedures
in UrJTAG. Apart from these, many flash chips implement a lot more
functionality via dedicated commands that vary from between manufacturers
and device families. UrJTAG can't cover them all natively.</simpara>

<simpara>It's however possible to send any command stream to the flash by using
the poke and peek commands. You just need to clarify two things:</simpara>

<orderedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
base address of the flash (BA)
    it's the same that's used for detectflash
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
data width, x8 or x16
    defined by the width of the bus where the flash is attached
</simpara>
</listitem>
</orderedlist>
<simpara>Next look up the address/data pairs for the command in question. The data
sheet for your particular flash should document all commands in a table e.g.
If your flash is attached in x16 mode, the address must be shifted by one
position. Addresses in x8 mode are not affected.</simpara>

<simpara>The "Read Manufacturer ID" command in x16 mode would look like</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">poke BA+(0x555*2) 0xaa
poke BA+(0x2aa*2) 0x55
poke BA+(0x555*2) 0x90
peek BA+(0x000*2)</literallayout>
<simpara>Note that the calculations must be done beforehand. UrJTAG can't evaluate
expressions on the command line.</simpara>

</section>
</section>
<section id="_jtag_commands">
<title>JTAG commands</title>
<section id="_overview">
<title>Overview</title>
<simpara>Following is a list of commands currently supported by jtag and some
example usage.</simpara>

<informaltable tabstyle="hlabeledlist" pgwide="0" frame="none" colsep="0" rowsep="0"><tgroup cols="2"><colspec colwidth="3*"/><colspec colwidth="7*"/><tbody valign="top">
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">bit</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
define new BSR bit
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">bus</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
change active bus
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">bsdl</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
manage BSDL files
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">cable</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
select JTAG cable
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">detect</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
detect parts on the JTAG chain
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">detectflash</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
detect parameters of flash chips attached to a part
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">discovery</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
discovery of unknown parts in the JTAG chain
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">dr</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
display or set active data register for a part
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">endian</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
set/print endianess for reading/writing binary files
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">eraseflash</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
erase flash memory by number of blocks
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">flashmem</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
burn flash memory with data from a file
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">frequency</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
setup JTAG frequency
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">get</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
get external signal value
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">help</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
display this help
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">include</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
include command sequence from external file
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">initbus</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
initialize bus driver for active part
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">instruction</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
change active instruction for a part or declare new instruction
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">part</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
change active part for current JTAG chain
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">peek</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
read a single word
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">poke</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
write a single word
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">print</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
display JTAG chain list/status
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">quit</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
exit and terminate this session
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">readmem</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
read content of the memory and write it to file
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">register</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
define new data register for a part
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">scan</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
detect changes on input pins of current part
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">set</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
set external signal value
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">shift</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
shift data/instruction registers through JTAG chain
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">signal</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
define new signal for a part
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">svf</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
execute SVF commands from file
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">writemem</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
write content from file to memory
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
</tbody></tgroup></informaltable>
<simpara>Some tools derived from the same openwince JTAG Tools code base as UrJTAG
know additional commands, which are not supported in UrJTAG. See the section
about "Unsupported commands", below, about workarounds.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_basic_commands">
<title>Basic commands</title>
<section id="_quit">
<title>quit</title>
<simpara>This command closes the jtag console.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_help">
<title>help</title>
<simpara>Without additional parameter it gives an overview of the available commands.
With a parameter you can get more information about any of the commands.
Example:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; help cable</literallayout>
<simpara>Most cable drivers require some more details about the cable to start properly.
To learn about the details, use the "cable" command with the name of the cable
followed by the word "help". Example:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; cable wiggler help</literallayout>
</section>
<section id="_include">
<title>include</title>
<simpara>Run commands from a named script file installed with UrJTAG or applies a BSDL
file to the active part. The directory prefix is added automatically
(e.g. /usr/share/urjtag/, depending on your installation), unless the file
name starts with a dot or slash.</simpara>

<simpara>For example, the following startup sequence configures the cable, chain, and
loads definitions and bus driver for a Samsung S3C4510B CPU to peek its memory
at 0x0:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; cable wiggler ppdev /dev/parport0
jtag&gt; detect
jtag&gt; include samsung/s3c4510b/s3c4510b
jtag&gt; peek 0x0000</literallayout>
<simpara>If the file contains valid BSDL syntax, it will be converted to native
commands on the fly.</simpara>

<simpara>Optionally, a number X may be specified following the file name, to cause
an X times repetition of the command sequence from the file.</simpara>

</section>
</section>
<section id="_chain_management">
<title>Chain management</title>
<section id="_cable">
<title>cable</title>
<simpara>Sets and initializes the cable driver. This is usually the first command that
you are executing in a session. Example:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; cable EA253 parallel 0x378
Initializing ETC EA253 JTAG Cable on parallel port at 0x378</literallayout>
<simpara>For a parallel cable using the ppdev driver you would use this:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; cable DLC5 ppdev /dev/parport0</literallayout>
<simpara>If you get an error, it may be that the parallel port kernel driver
was compiled as a module in your Linux kernel and wasn't loaded automatically.
Then you should try to load the ppdev driver manually (with root rights outside
the jtag shell):</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">modprobe ppdev
modprobe parport
modprobe parport_pc</literallayout>
<simpara>UrJTAG now also supports some USB cables. Unfortunately, there is no standard
for "JTAG over USB", so this support is limited to a few selected cables only.
For cables based on the FT2232 chip from FTDI, the cable command has to be
given cable name and optionally the driver name, USB Vendor, and Product ID of
the cable:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; cable ARM-USB-OCD vid=15ba pid=0003 driver=ftdi-mpsse</literallayout>
<simpara>For all known cables, UrJTAG knows the VID and PID so you can just say</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; cable ARM-USB-OCD</literallayout>
<simpara>If your cable isn't detected automatically though it's listed as a known and
supported cable, feel free to report its VID and PID. It might be a different
revision and should be added to the known &amp; tested list of cables.</simpara>

<simpara>As stated above, the driver name is not mandatory for the cable
command. UrJTAG will select the driver automatically based on UrJTAG's
configuration.  In case your system provides just one of libftdi or FTD2XX
the respective driver is selected. If both libraries are available, then
FTD2XX is selected. That's simply because FTD2XX showed some performance
advantages over libftdi in the past. You can still force libftdi with the
respective parameter.</simpara>

<warning><simpara>There's one quirk to consider when using FTDI's FTD2XX driver. It
connects to any known FTDI chip, randomly. I.e. if there's more than one FTDI
device connected to the host, chances are that the driver connects to the
wrong USB device. This might be an OEM USB-serial converter and you'll be
banging your head why there's no proper reading from the JTAG chain. Therefore
it's strongly recommended to specify the desc=xxx parameter for the cable
command if the ftd2xx driver is to be used. Set xxx to the product or serial
number descriptor string that are exhibited by the USB device.</simpara></warning>
</section>
<section id="_detect">
<title>detect</title>
<simpara>Detects devices on the chain. Example:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; detect
IR length: 5
Chain length: 1
Device Id: 01011001001001100100000000010011
  Manufacturer: Intel
  Part:         PXA250
  Stepping:     C0
  Filename:     /usr/local/share/jtag/intel/pxa250/pxa250c0</literallayout>
<simpara>During "detect", UrJTAG searches through the files in its database (usually in
/usr/share/urjtag) and optionally in the search path for BSDL files (see bsdl
command) to find a match for the manufacturer, revision and part number for the
IDCODE read from the part. However, not all parts identify themselves in a way
that is useful for "detect". For example, many chips with an ARM processor core
inside present an IDCODE that may be specific to the the particular core inside
the chip (e.g. ARM7TDMI), but doesn't tell about the actual manufacturer of
the chip. In such case, the data for the part has to be included manually. See
also the documentation for the "include" command.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_print">
<title>print</title>
<simpara>Print a list of parts in the chain and the currently active instruction per part.
Further details of bus, signals and instructions can be obtained with dedicated
command options, see "help print".</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_initbus">
<title>initbus</title>
<simpara>Selects and initializes a bus of the currently selected part, e.g. the external
memory bus of a CPU. This is required in order to access chips that aren't
connected in the JTAG chain, but indirectly accessible through other chips
(e.g. CPU or programmable logic).</simpara>

<simpara>Type "help initbus" to get a list of supported bus types.
If you do not find a bus driver for your specific hardware, you might be lucky
enough to have EJTAG in your target (most MIPS-based CPUs do) and should try
the "ejtag" bus driver. In contrast to the method "via BSR", it uploads some
instructions to the CPU and triggers their execution to access the bus, and
should work with almost any EJTAG-capable chip (Note: JTAG isn't EJTAG):</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; initbus ejtag</literallayout>
<simpara>There's another option to support new chips "via BSR", the "prototype" bus
driver, which can be adapted to support your part with command parameters.
The only prerequisite for using this driver is knowledge of the names of the
signals that represent address bus, data bus, and enable signals, and that
address and data lines are numbered in order.</simpara>

<simpara>For example, assume the signals are named in the BSDL description as follows:</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Data bus: D0, D1, &#8230; D31
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Address bus: ADDR0, ADDR1, &#8230; ADDR22
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Output Enable: nOE
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Write Enable: nWE
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Chip Select: nRCS0
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>The enable signals seem to be active low (indicated by the leading "n" in their
names). Further we assume the interesting connected part, some flash chip, is
only 16 bits wide even though the data bus width is 32 bits.  With this
information, you could use the following command (all on a single line!) to
access the bus:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">initbus prototype amsb=ADDR22 alsb=ADDR0 dmsb=D15 dlsb=D0
          ncs=nRCS0 nwe=nWE noe=nOE amode=x16</literallayout>
<simpara>The "prototype" bus driver cannot deal with systems where address and data
bus are multiplexed on the same pins. If signals aren't numbered in the right
order or with gaps, you may get along by defining proper names as aliases for
the actual signals, with commands like "salias ADDR12 BSCGX44".</simpara>

<simpara>Most drivers work "via BSR", i.e. they directly access the pins of the device.
Because it isn't possible to efficiently address only particular pins but only
all at once, and data for all pins has to be transferred through JTAG for every
single change, this method isn't the fastest, but usually easiest to implement
and, well, sometimes it counts whether it works at all.</simpara>

<simpara>The "fjmem" (FPGA JTAG memory) bus driver attempts to address this issue by
moving control and observation away from BSR to a device-internal
register. For sure this is only possible on FPGAs where the designer can hook
additional logic to the JTAG chain. A core design plus examples for different
FPGA families is available in the extra/fjmem directory. Refer to the README
located there.</simpara>

<simpara>Some chips don't allow direct access to their pins via BSR at all. For these,
writing a new bus driver that utilizes a debug module to upload specific code
to access the bus is inevitable.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_bus">
<title>bus</title>
<simpara>It's possible to initialize more than one bus for part(s) within a chain. The
"bus" command allows to select the active bus for readmem, flashmem,
etc. operation.</simpara>

</section>
</section>
<section id="_part_definition_commands">
<title>Part definition commands</title>
<simpara>The following commands are also used in the data files to define a device (IC)
on the JTAG chain. It is not recommended to use these commands in an interactive
session. Instead you should produce a device definition file out of a .bsd file
using one of the supplied tools (or use the new BSDL subsystem, see below).</simpara>

<informaltable tabstyle="hlabeledlist" pgwide="0" frame="none" colsep="0" rowsep="0"><tgroup cols="2"><colspec colwidth="3*"/><colspec colwidth="7*"/><tbody valign="top">
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">bit</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
define new BSR bit
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">instruction</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
change active instruction for a part or declare new instruction
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">register</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
define new data register for a part
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">signal</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
define new signal for a part
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
</tbody></tgroup></informaltable>
</section>
<section id="_tap_control">
<title>TAP control</title>
<simpara>The following commands can be used to directly manipulate and display the state
of the TAP controller(s) and registers in the chain:</simpara>

<informaltable tabstyle="hlabeledlist" pgwide="0" frame="none" colsep="0" rowsep="0"><tgroup cols="2"><colspec colwidth="3*"/><colspec colwidth="7*"/><tbody valign="top">
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">dr</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
display or set active data register for a part
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">instruction</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
change active instruction for a part or declare new instruction
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">get</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
get external signal value
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">pod</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
low level direct access to POD signals like TRST; use with care
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">scan</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
detect changes on input pins of current part
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">set</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
set external signal value
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">shift</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
shift data/instruction registers through JTAG chain
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
</tbody></tgroup></informaltable>
</section>
<section id="_ram_flash_access">
<title>RAM/Flash access</title>
<simpara>These commands can be used if a part in the chain has memory connected to it
(or integrated). Before they can be used, a bus driver has to be selected and
initialized (see initbus command).</simpara>

<informaltable tabstyle="hlabeledlist" pgwide="0" frame="none" colsep="0" rowsep="0"><tgroup cols="2"><colspec colwidth="3*"/><colspec colwidth="7*"/><tbody valign="top">
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">detectflash</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
detect parameters of flash chips attached to a part
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">endian</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
set/print endianess for reading/writing binary files
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">eraseflash</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
erase flash memory by number of blocks
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">flashmem</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
burn flash memory with data from a file
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">peek</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
read a single word
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">poke</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
write a single word
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">readmem</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
read content of the memory and write it to file
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
<emphasis role="strong">writemem</emphasis>
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
write content from file to memory
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
</tbody></tgroup></informaltable>
</section>
<section id="_highlevel_commands">
<title>Highlevel commands</title>
<section id="_svf">
<title>svf</title>
<simpara>The SVF player operates on a single part in the scan chain. Therefore, you
have to bring up the JTAG software, specify a cable and detect the scan
chain beforehand.</simpara>

<simpara>The player will establish a new instruction called "SIR" and a new register
called "SDR". They are used internally by the respective SVF commands and are
reassigned with new values as the player advances through the file. It is not
recommended to use them outside of the SVF player as their content is dynamic.</simpara>

<simpara>An example session:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; cable ppdev /dev/parport0 DLC5
Initializing Xilinx DLC5 JTAG Parallel Cable III on ppdev port /dev/parport0
jtag&gt; detect
IR length: 5
Chain length: 1
Device Id: 10010000101000100000000010010011
  Manufacturer: Xilinx
  Part:         XC2S300E-PQ208
  Stepping:     9
  Filename:     /usr/local/share/jtag/xilinx/xc2s300e-pq208/xc2s300e-pq208
jtag&gt; part &lt;desired part of the scan chain&gt;
jtag&gt; svf &lt;SVF file for selected part&gt;
jtag&gt; instruction BYPASS
jtag&gt; shift ir
jtag&gt; part &lt;next part&gt;
jtag&gt; svf &lt;SVF file for selected part&gt;
jtag&gt; instruction BYPASS
jtag&gt; shift ir</literallayout>
<simpara>It is recommended to set the part's instruction register to BYPASS although
most SVF files do this at the end. By setting the instruction explicitely to
BYPASS the output of the print command will always show meaningful
information.</simpara>

<simpara>The SVF player will issue messages when situations arise that cannot be
handled. These messages are classified as warnings or errors depending on
whether the player can continue operation (warning) or not (error).
In case the TDO parameter of an SDR command leads to a mismatch the player
issues a warning and continues. If the player should abort in this case then
specify <emphasis>stop</emphasis> at the svf command.</simpara>

<simpara>The absence of error or warning messages indicate that the SVF file was
executed without problems. To get a progress reporting while the player advances
through the SVF file, specify <emphasis>progress</emphasis> at the svf command.</simpara>

<sidebar>
<title>Limitations and Deficiencies</title>
<simpara>Several limitations exist for the SVF player.</simpara>

<simpara>The implementation of some SVF commands has deficiencies.</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
HIR, HDR commands not supported.
    Their functionality should be covered by the part concept of UrJTAG.
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
PIO command not supported.
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
PIOMAP command not supported.
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
RUNTEST SCK not supported.
    The maximum time constraint is not guaranteed.
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
TRST
    Parameters Z and ABSENT are not supported.
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
TIR, TDR commands not supported.
    Their functionality should be covered by the part concept of UrJTAG.
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>SVF files for programming flash-based devices might or might not work for a given
setup. This has been observed for Actel IGLOO devices where success and failure
depends on the actual clocking rate of the chosen cable.</simpara>

<simpara>The ref_freq=&lt;&#8230;&gt; option to the svf command allows to tweak the calculation
of <emphasis>RUNTEST xxx SEC</emphasis> commands. For these commands, the SVF player needs to
calculate the equivalent number of clocks and per default it will use the
current cable clock frequency. This can be overridden with the ref_freq option
that specifies a fixed reference frequency for such calculations.</simpara>

</sidebar>
</section>
<section id="_bsdl">
<title>bsdl</title>
<simpara>The <emphasis>bsdl</emphasis> command is used to set up and test the underlying BSDL subsystem of
UrJTAG.</simpara>

<simpara>Whenever <emphasis>detect</emphasis> encounters a new part, a configuration process is
started. This involves matching the retrieved IDCODE against the part
descriptions in /usr/share/urjtag as described above. However, before this
database is searched for a suitable description, the BSDL subsystem is started
and searches for a BSDL file that matches this device. If it finds a matching
file, traversal of the /usr/share/urjtag database is skipped. If not, then
this standard process follows.</simpara>

<simpara>To tell the BSDL subsytem where to look for BSDL files, the <emphasis>bsdl path
pathlist</emphasis> command has to be issued prior to <emphasis>detect</emphasis>. The contents of
<emphasis>pathlist</emphasis> must be a semicolon-separated list of directories where BSDL files
are located. This list is stored by <emphasis>bsdl path</emphasis> and is used later on when
<emphasis>detect</emphasis> calls the BSDL subsystem.</simpara>

<important><simpara>The BSDL subsystem applies the first BSDL file that parses without
errors and that contains the correct IDCODE. Scanning the specified
directories happens in exactly the given order. Inside a directory however,
the order depends largely on your filesystem's behavior.</simpara></important>
<simpara>Further details of the <emphasis>bsdl</emphasis> command:</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
bsdl path &lt;path1&gt;[;&lt;path2&gt;[;&lt;pathN&gt;]]
    set paths for locating BSDL files
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
bsdl debug on|off
    switches debug messages on or off
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
bsdl test [file]
    reads file (if specified) or all files found via <emphasis>bsdl path</emphasis> and
    prints a short status, an active part is not required
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
bsdl dump [file]
    reads file (if specified) or all files found via <emphasis>bsdl path</emphasis> and
    prints all configuration commands, an active part is not required
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<tip><simpara>The <emphasis>bsdl dump file</emphasis> command implements the same functionality as
bsdl2jtag.</simpara></tip>
</section>
</section>
<section id="_unsupported_commands">
<title>Unsupported commands</title>
<section id="_script">
<title>script</title>
<simpara>Although it's still there, its functionality has been merged into the include
command. Please use "include" instead.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_setdevice">
<title>setdevice</title>
<simpara>This command was only there to support the SHARC 21065L processor,
which has no IDCODE and therefore can't be initialized correctly by
just running "detect". However, the proper initialization can be done
after "detect" by loading the proper declarations and bus driver manually:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">jtag&gt; include analog/sharc21065l/sharc21065l</literallayout>
</section>
<section id="_spiflashmem">
<title>spiflashmem</title>
<simpara>The commands "spidetectflash", "spiflashmem", "spireadflash" and
"spieraseflash" only exist in a version of the JTAG tools copyrighted by
Intratrade Ltd., we just know about them from a posting on the net.</simpara>

</section>
</section>
</section>
</chapter>
<chapter id="_internals">
<title>Internals</title>
<simpara>This section is only a placeholder for the information that will
be added soon&#8230;</simpara>

<section id="_files">
<title>Files</title>
<section id="_source_code_overview">
<title>Source code Overview</title>
<informaltable tabstyle="hlabeledlist" pgwide="0" frame="none" colsep="0" rowsep="0"><tgroup cols="2"><colspec colwidth="3*"/><colspec colwidth="7*"/><tbody valign="top">
<row>
<entry><simpara>
doc/
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
Documentation
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
data/
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
Part descriptions (data files)
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
include/
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
C header files
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
src/
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
C source code
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
src/bsdl
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
BSDL subsystem
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
src/bus
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
Bus driver for various CPUs and other parts
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
src/cmd
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
Implementation of the commands for the "jtag" shell
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
src/flash
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
Flash detection and programming algorithms
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
src/jim
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
JIM, the JTAG target simulator
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
src/lib
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
Utility functions
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
src/part
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
Functions for accessing specific parts in a chain
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
src/svf
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
SVF player
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry><simpara>
src/tap
</simpara></entry>
<entry>
<simpara>
Functions for accessing the chain in general
</simpara>
</entry>
</row>
</tbody></tgroup></informaltable>
</section>
</section>
<section id="_drivers">
<title>Drivers</title>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Cable drivers
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Link drivers
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
TAP drivers
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Chain drivers
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Bus drivers
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Flash drivers
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Commands
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<section id="_cable_specific_drivers_src_tap_cable">
<title>Cable-specific drivers (src/tap/cable)</title>
<simpara>Cable-specific drivers are those which are visible to the user through
the "jtag" command shell. They're listed in response to the "help cable"
command. Each driver has to provide the following functions:</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
connect(), init() - Initialization
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
done(), cable_free(), disconnect() - Cleaning up
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
set_frequency() - set bitrate for shifting data through the chain
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
clock(), get_tdo(), transfer() - immediate JTAG activities
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
flush() - internally used to actually perform JTAG activities
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
help() - a help text to be displayed by the jtag command shell
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<section id="_initialization">
<title>Initialization</title>
<simpara>After allocating a "cable_t" structure, a pointer to it and further
parameters (as strings) have to be passed first  to the selected cable's
connect() function.</simpara>

<simpara>Following that, the init() function is called via cable_init(). If cable_init()
returns a zero value, all is fine and the cable is ready for use.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_cleaning_up">
<title>Cleaning up</title>
<simpara>There are two functions for actual cleanup:</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
done() is responsible for driving the hardware to a safe and consistent state.
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
cable_free() then can be used to clean up eventually extra allocated memory etc.
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>Both are usually called from chain_disconnect().</simpara>

<simpara>An additional mechanism allows to clean up if a disconnection was detected by
the low level driver (e.g. USB or parallel port driver). A cable has to provide
a disconnect() function for this purpose:</simpara>

<orderedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Low level (e.g. parport) driver calls cable driver-&gt;disconnect()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
cable driver-&gt;disconnect() calls chain_disconnect()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
chain_disconnect() calls cable driver-&gt;done()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
chain_disconnect() then calls cable driver-&gt;cable_free()
</simpara>
</listitem>
</orderedlist>
<simpara>After return from chain_disconnect() to cable driver-&gt;disconnect(), the cable_t
structure has been freed and must not be accessed anymore.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_jtag_activities">
<title>JTAG Activities</title>
<simpara>Currently the API provides five different functions for performing operations
at the JTAG interface on the low level signal level (using the four signals
TMS, TCK, TDI, and TDO).</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
clock(tms,tdi,n) takes values for TMS and TDI output as its parameters, ensures that actual cable signals are set accordingly, and does a 0-1 transition on TCK (n times)
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
get_tdo() returns the current value at the TDO input.
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
set_trst(x) sets the TRST signal and returns the current value.
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
get_trst() returns the current value of the TRST signal.
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>For many JTAG adapters, there's almost no delay when doing alternating clock()
and get_tdo(). Writing and reading happens immediately and the result is
available immediately as well. This is the case with most parallel port
adapters (but not when attached to USB-to-parallel adapters or USB docking
stations) and memory mapped IO (e.g. general purpose I/O pins of
microcontrollers).</simpara>

<simpara>But there are adapters, especially USB and Ethernet based adapters, which
exhibit a rather long delay between the initiation of reading a bit and the
delivery of the value of the bit. It is at least 1 millisecond with USB,
which would limit the transfer rate to 1 kHz.  One way to workaround this
is to transmit bits compacted into bytes and chunks of bytes, which is
possible with the transfer() function.</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
transfer(in, out)
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>The transfer() function does a series of TCK pulses, with data for TDI read as
bytes from memory. The bytes are automatically serialized. TMS is set to zero
during transfer()s. Optionally, prior to each bit shifted out to the interface,
TDO input can be read into memory (deserialized into a byte array of the same
size as the input array).</simpara>

<simpara>It still doesn't yield much improvement if the operation consists of many read
and write transitions (e.g. repeatedly writing an instruction and some data
register values, then reading from the data register, as it is necessary for
memory access). For that reason, the above functions are also available in
variants that don't cause immediate activity, but rather schedule it for later.
In the API, they're visible as</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
cable_defer_clock()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
cable_defer_get_tdo()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
cable_defer_set_trst()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
cable_defer_get_trst()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
cable_defer_transfer()
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>These functions aren't implemented in the cable driver (but currently in
src/tap/cable.c).  The cable driver just has to provide a flush() function to
actually execute the queued activity in some cable-specific optimal way, and
to store the results of get_tdo() and transfer() activity. The caller later
can pick up the results using these functions (implemented in cable.c):</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
cable_get_tdo_late()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
cable_get_trst_late()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
cable_transfer_late()
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>As an example, consider the following sequence of activities:</simpara>

<orderedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
clock()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
get_tdo()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
clock()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
get_tdo()
</simpara>
</listitem>
</orderedlist>
<simpara>If the result of the first get_tdo() isn't absolutely required before the
second clock(), the sequence can be optimized into the following sequence (if</simpara>

<orderedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
defer_clock()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
defer_clock()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
flush()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
get_tdo_late()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
get_tdo_late()
</simpara>
</listitem>
</orderedlist>
<simpara>The next sections explain the queueing mechanism and its limits in detail.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_when_flushing_occurs">
<title>When flushing occurs</title>
<simpara>The cable_flush() function is used to flush the queue towards the cable. It
takes one additional argument, "how_much", which may be one of</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
OPTIONALLY: The cable driver may flush if it's reasonable (e.g. if the
   queue has been filled so that some buffer limit for the cable interface
   is reached). It would be wise to flush early to keep the queue small, if
   there is no point in queueing up more items because the transfer to the
   cable would have to be split into smaller chunks anyway. This is used by
   UrJTAG immediately after adding items to the queue.
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
TO_OUTPUT: The cable driver should at least flush as much so that one
   output becomes available in the output queue. If there's already something
   in the output queue, this should be interpreted similar to OPTIONALLY. This
   is used by UrJTAG immediately before it wants to use that output.
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
COMPLETELY: The cable driver has to flush the queue completely. This is
   used by UrJTAG immediately before actions that circumvent the queueing
   such as calls to the legacy clock/get_tdo functions. It could also be
   used by application code to ensure that some action is actually done in
   time.
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>
<section id="_jtag_activity_queueing">
<title>JTAG activity queueing</title>
<simpara>The source in src/tap/cable.c provides to important functions to access the
two queues "todo" (with activity to be done) and "done" (with results):</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
cable_add_queue_item
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
cable_get_queue_item
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>In src/tap/cable/generic.c you'll find two implementations of dequeueing
algorithms, i.e. implementations of the flush() function. These could be used
by any new cable driver unless it provides a more sophisticated algorithm
itself:</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
generic_flush_one_by_one() simply calls the "classic" functions one after
   another. The performance of the cable driver using this implementation will
   be the same whether the immediate or defer variants of the functions are used.
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
generic_flush_using_transfer() tries to optimize as many clock() and
   get_tdo() by transforming them into calls to transfer() instead. This can
   give a slight advantage.
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>The generic implementations also serve as a template for new cable-specific
implementations.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_generic_implementations">
<title>Generic implementations</title>
<simpara>As a reference and in many cases completely sufficient for new cables, take a
look at the code in src/tap/cable/generic.c, which contains generic routines,
suitable for parallel port based cables (and some for other types of cables as
well).</simpara>

</section>
</section>
<section id="_link_drivers">
<title>Link drivers</title>
<simpara>Link drivers like the "parport" driver collection provide the basis for
communication between cable driver and actual JTAG adapter. The openwince JTAG
tools supported only parallel port links with the "parport" drivers. UrJTAG
introduced support for USB links, but in the early releases the drivers for
these just mimic the parallel port links.</simpara>

<simpara>The basic functions provided by all link drivers are</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
connect(), to called from cable driver connect()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
open(), to actually connect to the device during cable driver init()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
close(), to disconnect from the device during cable driver done()
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
free(), to free all resources, called from cable driver free()
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<section id="_parport">
<title>parport</title>
<simpara>Currently there are parport drivers for direct access to the parallel port on a
PC using I/O addresses (direct.c), and for using ppdev on Linux or ppi on FreeBSD.</simpara>

<simpara>In addition, there are "ftdi" and "ftd2xx" parport drivers that actually are for
communication with USB cables based on FTDI chips. They cannot be used for
connecting old parallel port cables through parallel to USB adapters with FTDI
chips, and probably soon will be rewritten as "usbconn" drivers instead.</simpara>

<simpara>All parport drivers present a common API for setting and reading signals.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_usbconn">
<title>usbconn</title>
<simpara>The usbconn drivers provide a common API to search for and connect with USB
devices. At the moment, there are drivers for libusd, libftdi and FTD2XX
(e.g. to communicate with FTDI chip based cables through libftdi and/or
FTD2XX, to communicate with Cypress FX2 using EZUSB.SYS or CyUSB.sys, and
more).</simpara>

</section>
</section>
<section id="_bus_drivers">
<title>Bus drivers</title>
<simpara>Bus drivers translate read and write operations on a bus into JTAG commands
and methods. A bus in this context is neither restricted to a processor bus,
nor to memory. Any system component that can be read from and written to could
be seen as attached to a bus. I.e. external or internal memory (RAM, ROM,
Flash) and peripherals connected to a processor or simply an FPGA with 1:1
connections.</simpara>

<simpara>The available bus drivers are listed in response to "help initbus". Each
driver has to provide the following functions:</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
bus_new() - Initialization
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
bus_free() - Cleaning up
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
bus_printinfo() - Short description
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
bus_prepare() - Preparation
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
bus_area() - Description of the bus geometry
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
bus_read_start() - Initiate reading
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
bus_read_next() - Read access
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
bus_read_end() - Finish reading
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
bus_read() - Atomic reading
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
bus_write() - Write access
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<important><simpara>Address parameters to the functions listed above specify always
byte locations, independent of the actual data width. The bus driver has to
adjust the address on its own if required.</simpara></important>
<section id="_creation">
<title>Creation</title>
<simpara>Upon calling of its bus_new() function, the driver allocates a "bus_t"
structure and performs all required internal initializations.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_initialization_2">
<title>Initialization</title>
<simpara>After creation of the new "bus_t" structure, the bus_init() function will
be called to give the driver the possibility to initialize it's internal
states or BSR bits as required. Such functionality has been split from
bus_new() since some drivers require to re-initialize during runtime.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_cleaning_up_2">
<title>Cleaning up</title>
<simpara>The driver is supposed to free all allocated memory (including its "bus_t"
structure). Additionally, it should set the device into a state that doesn't
prevent it from normal operation.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_short_description">
<title>Short description</title>
<simpara>Prints a message describing the driver. This function is called by the "print"
command before it lists the areas covered by this bus driver.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_preparation">
<title>Preparation</title>
<simpara>This function is called whenever a bus operation is initiated. The
driver should perform the required preparation steps so that
subsequent calls to the bus_read_* and bus_write functions can perform
their tasks properly.</simpara>

<simpara>E.g. a BSR bus driver would put the device into EXTEST mode to activate the
boundary scan register on the device pins.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_description_of_the_bus_geometry">
<title>Description of the bus geometry</title>
<simpara>At certain stages, the bus driver's bus_area() function is called by other
commands to query the bus geometry for a given address. The bus driver must
fill in the fields of a "bus_area_t" structure describing the geometry of the
area in which the specified address is located:</simpara>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
a short textual description of the area
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
start address of area
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
length of area in bytes
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
data width in bits
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<simpara>Queries with an address out of range must result in an area length of</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">UINT64_C(0x100000000)</literallayout>
</section>
<section id="_initiate_reading">
<title>Initiate reading</title>
<simpara>Since the JTAG state machine defines a capture-shift-update sequence, it is
required to shift the address for a read prior to capturing the read
data. Therefore, the bus_read_start() function is called with the very first
address to read from. This enables the driver to shift the address into the
device before it can actually retrieve the read data for this address.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_read_access">
<title>Read access</title>
<simpara>The bus_read_next() function fetches the read data from the device that has
been addressed by a previous call to bus_read_start() or
bus_read_next(). Again, this is due to the capture-shift-update sequence of
JTAG:</simpara>

<orderedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
capture read data from device pins
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
shift new address
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
update new address to device pins
</simpara>
</listitem>
</orderedlist>
<important><simpara>The address parameter specifies the location of the <emphasis>following</emphasis>
read access. It is not the address of the data returned by this function call.</simpara></important>
</section>
<section id="_finish_reading">
<title>Finish reading</title>
<simpara>Function "bus_read_end()" is called at the end of a read sequence. I.e. when
the higher level command determines that the last data portion is to be read
from the device. There is no new address and the function driver is supposed
to return the read data that was addressed previously.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_atomic_reading">
<title>Atomic reading</title>
<simpara>For ease of use, a bus driver has to supply a "bus_read()" function that
encapsulates reading data from a single address in an atomic operation. Bus
drivers typically build this function from "bus_read_start()" and a subsequent
"bus_read_end()".</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_write_access">
<title>Write access</title>
<simpara>This function writes one data element at the specified address. Since this
translates to a single JTAG operation (capture ignored, shift and update
address &amp; data), there is no splitting as with the read functions.</simpara>

</section>
</section>
</section>
<section id="_data_file_format">
<title>Data file format</title>
<simpara>JTAG declarations files are located in directory "data". The files contains
common part specific JTAG information in parseable form, e.g.  list of the JTAG
commands, boundary scan register, list of JTAG registers, etc.</simpara>

<simpara>Syntax of the JTAG declaration file is defined in the following subsections.</simpara>

<section id="_general_rules">
<title>General rules</title>
<simpara>JTAG declaration file is text file which consists of lines. Empty lines are
ignored. Text after first "#" on the line to the end of line is ignored. This
is useful for comments.  All other lines are significant.</simpara>

<simpara>Each significant line consists of tokens separated by whitespace. Whitespace
could be spaces and/or tabs.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_signal_definition">
<title>Signal Definition</title>
<simpara>Signal definition line consists of word "signal" followed by whitespace and
signal name (without spaces in the name). Rest of the line should contain
whitespace separated list of pins of the part. This list is currently not used
for any purpose in JTAG Tools. It is intended for future use.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_manufacturers_list">
<title>Manufacturers List</title>
<simpara>The <emphasis>data/MANUFACTURERS</emphasis> file is used to locate the manufacturer of a specific
device found in the JTAG chain.  If you get the error <emphasis role="strong">Unknown manufacturer</emphasis>
when attempting the <emphasis>detect</emphasis> command, this is the file you need to update.</simpara>

<simpara>See the JEDEC document for more information:
JEDEC Solid State Technology Association, "Standard Manufacturer's
Identification Code", September 2001, Order Number: JEP106-K</simpara>

<section id="_format">
<title>Format</title>
<simpara>The first token is a bit string that matches bits 11-1 of the device's IDCODE.
We omit bit 0 because it should always be 1 (per the JEDEC standard).</simpara>

<simpara>The second token is the name of the directory under <emphasis>data/</emphasis> to search for
specific part information.</simpara>

<simpara>The rest of the line is the human readable form of the manufacturer's name.</simpara>

<simpara>For example, we find this in <emphasis>data/MANUFACTURERS</emphasis>:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">00001100101   analog          Analog Devices, Inc.</literallayout>
<simpara>The manufacturer's IDCODE is <literal>000011001011</literal> (notice the last bit is stripped),
more part information can be found under <emphasis>data/analog/</emphasis>, and the human friendly
name is <literal>Analog Devices, Inc.</literal>.</simpara>

</section>
</section>
<section id="_parts_list">
<title>Parts List</title>
<simpara>Every manufacturer subdirectory needs a <emphasis>PARTS</emphasis> file.  This is used to look
up further information about a part such as the stepping and signal list.  If
you get the error <emphasis role="strong">Unknown part</emphasis> when attempting the <emphasis>detect</emphasis> command, this is
the file you need to update.</simpara>

<section id="_format_2">
<title>Format</title>
<simpara>The first token is a bit string that matches bits 27-12 of the device's IDCODE.</simpara>

<simpara>The second token is the name of the directory under the manufacturer's <emphasis>data/</emphasis>
directory to search for specific part information.</simpara>

<simpara>The rest of the line is the human readable form of the part's name.</simpara>

<simpara>For example, we find this in <emphasis>data/analog/PARTS</emphasis>:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">0010011111001000      bf537                   BF537</literallayout>
<simpara>The part's IDCODE is <literal>0010011111001000</literal>, more part information can be found
under <emphasis>data/analog/bf537/</emphasis>, and the human friendly name is <literal>BF537</literal>.</simpara>

</section>
</section>
<section id="_stepping_list">
<title>Stepping List</title>
<simpara>Every part subdirectory needs a <emphasis>STEPPINGS</emphasis> file.  This is used to find the
file that contains information like the signals list.  If you get the error
<emphasis role="strong">Unknown stepping</emphasis> when attempting the <emphasis>detect</emphasis> command, this is the file you
need to update.</simpara>

<section id="_format_3">
<title>Format</title>
<simpara>The first token is a bit string that matches bits 31-28 of the device's IDCODE.</simpara>

<simpara>The second token is the name of the file to load that contains information like
the signal list, extra instructions/registers, etc&#8230;  This file should be
placed alongside the <emphasis>STEPPINGS</emphasis> file in the part-specific subdirectory.</simpara>

<simpara>The rest of the line is the human readable form of the part stepping's name.</simpara>

<simpara>For example, we find this in <emphasis>data/analog/bf537/STEPPINGS</emphasis>:</simpara>

<literallayout class="monospaced">0010  bf537           2</literallayout>
<simpara>The part's stepping is <literal>0010</literal>, signal information can be found in the file
<emphasis>data/analog/bf537/bf537</emphasis>, and the human friendly stepping name is <literal>2</literal>.</simpara>

</section>
</section>
</section>
<section id="_development">
<title>Development</title>
<section id="_future_plans">
<title>Future Plans</title>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
C API and library package
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Bindings for Python, Perl, &#8230;
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
TCP/IP access
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
New cable drivers
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
&#8230;
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>
<section id="_how_to_contribute">
<title>How to contribute</title>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Using Subversion
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Create and submit a patch
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Use SourceForge trackers
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>
</section>
</chapter>
<chapter id="_f_a_q">
<title>F.A.Q.</title>
<simpara>For a list of known problems in current versions, please also check the "Bugs"
tracker at the UrJTAG website!</simpara>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term>
Q. The documentation is incomplete. Where can I get more information?
</term>
<listitem>
<simpara>
  A. Please ask in the "Using UrJTAG" Forum on <ulink url="http://urjtag.org">http://urjtag.org</ulink>
</simpara>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>
Q. My flash isn't detected or can't be programmed. What can I do?
</term>
<listitem>
<simpara>
  A. Please record the output of the "detect" and "detectflash" commands and ask in the Forum. If possible, re-compile UrJTAG before with "&#8212;enable-jedec-exp" to get extra information.
</simpara>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>
Q. My CPU/FPGA/etc. chip isn't detected. What can I do?
</term>
<listitem>
<simpara>
  A. First try to get hold of a "BSDL" description of the chip from the vendor, and specify where to find this file to UrJTAG using "bsdl path" before you "detect". Second, a bus driver has to be selected. Maybe "ejtag" or "prototype" work.
</simpara>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>
Q. When I type "cable parallel 0x378 DLC5" (in a Cygwin environment) I get "Unknown port driver: parallel"?
</term>
<listitem>
<simpara>
  A. Please install the Cygwin ioperm package, and re-configure/compile.
</simpara>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>
Q. When I type "cable parallel 0x378 DLC5" (in a Cygwin environment) I get "Error: Cable initialization failed!".
</term>
<listitem>
<simpara>
  A. Please install ioperm.sys driver using <literal>ioperm -i</literal> command.
</simpara>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>
Q. When running autogen.sh, I get "Can't exec "autopoint": No such file or directory"
</term>
<listitem>
<simpara>
  A. You need the headers for gettext (e.g. Debian package "gettext-devel").
</simpara>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>
Q. When running autogen.sh, it complains about missing CVS
</term>
<listitem>
<simpara>
  A. The easiest solution is to actually install CVS for this step, just to get around this error message.
</simpara>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>
Q. During compilation, I get "svf_bison.y: No such file or directory"
</term>
<listitem>
<simpara>
  A. You need "bison".
</simpara>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>
Q. During compilation, I get "flex: can't open &#8230; src/svf/svf_flex.l"
</term>
<listitem>
<simpara>
  A. You need "flex"
</simpara>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>
Q. During compilation, I get "src/svf/svf_flex.l", line 27: unrecognized %option: bison-locations"
</term>
<listitem>
<simpara>
  A. You need a newer version of flex. It should be 2.5.31 or newer;
    Unfortunately, Cygwin comes with only 2.5.4a. You may try to compile and
    install a newer version of flex from source to solve this. The distributed
    source tarball contains source pregenerated with a current flex version,
    you need flex yourself only to compile from fresh SVN checkouts.
</simpara>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>
Q. When running "make install", I get "Permission denied" errors
</term>
<listitem>
<simpara>
  A. If you want to install into a system directory (the default /usr/local is one), you'll have to run "make install" as the  superuser, e.g. do "sudo make install".
</simpara>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>
Q. My BSDL file defines the bus DAT as bit_vector(15 downto 0), how should I access single elements?
</term>
<listitem>
<simpara>
  A. BSDL syntax is an extension of the VHDL language. Array elements are indexed with
    parentheses: DAT(4) selects index number 4 of the DAT vector. Also refer to the "print
    signals" command.
</simpara>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>
Q. My board requires certain signals to be set to dedicated values before external memories can be accessed.
</term>
<listitem>
<simpara>
  A. Most (if not all) BSR-based bus drivers allow for static configurations of
    pins that are controlled by BSR bits. Apply the required "set" commands before
    issueing the "initbus &#8230;" command. These settings are preserved by all bus
    related commands if they don't collide with the signals required for bus operation.
</simpara>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>
Q. My USB pod seems slow.
</term>
<listitem>
<simpara>
  A. USB-based JTAG pods suffer from a couple of intrinsic issues. Consider the
    following to get maximum performance:
</simpara>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Run UrJTAG on native linux. Cygwin and VMWare are reportedly slower.
</simpara>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<simpara>
Connect the pod via a high speed USB hub to a high speed USB host port.
      Even though the pod is a full speed device, it benefits from the shorter
      turn-around times between host and hub.
</simpara>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>
</chapter>
<chapter id="_licensing">
<title>Licensing</title>
<section id="_overview_2">
<title>Overview</title>
<simpara>Various licenses are used for the UrJTAG project. The GPL is used for most
of the code except for some include files, JIM, and cable driver source, where
a BSD or MIT license is used; this is noted in the file headers.</simpara>

</section>
<section id="_gnu_free_documentation_license_fdl">
<title>GNU Free Documentation License (FDL)</title>
<literallayout class="monospaced">                GNU Free Documentation License
                  Version 1.2, November 2002


 Copyright (C) 2000,2001,2002  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
     51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301  USA
 Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
 of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.


0. PREAMBLE

The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
functional and useful document "free" in the sense of freedom: to
assure everyone the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it,
with or without modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially.
Secondarily, this License preserves for the author and publisher a way
to get credit for their work, while not being considered responsible
for modifications made by others.

This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative
works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense.  It
complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft
license designed for free software.

We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free
software, because free software needs free documentation: a free
program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that the
software does.  But this License is not limited to software manuals;
it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or
whether it is published as a printed book.  We recommend this License
principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.


1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS

This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medium, that
contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be
distributed under the terms of this License.  Such a notice grants a
world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in duration, to use that
work under the conditions stated herein.  The "Document", below,
refers to any such manual or work.  Any member of the public is a
licensee, and is addressed as "you".  You accept the license if you
copy, modify or distribute the work in a way requiring permission
under copyright law.

A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the
Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with
modifications and/or translated into another language.

A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section of
the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the
publishers or authors of the Document to the Document's overall subject
(or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly
within that overall subject.  (Thus, if the Document is in part a
textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any
mathematics.)  The relationship could be a matter of historical
connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal,
commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding
them.

The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles
are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice
that says that the Document is released under this License.  If a
section does not fit the above definition of Secondary then it is not
allowed to be designated as Invariant.  The Document may contain zero
Invariant Sections.  If the Document does not identify any Invariant
Sections then there are none.

The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are listed,
as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that
the Document is released under this License.  A Front-Cover Text may
be at most 5 words, and a Back-Cover Text may be at most 25 words.

A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
represented in a format whose specification is available to the
general public, that is suitable for revising the document
straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of
pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available
drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or
for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input
to text formatters.  A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file
format whose markup, or absence of markup, has been arranged to thwart
or discourage subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent.
An image format is not Transparent if used for any substantial amount
of text.  A copy that is not "Transparent" is called "Opaque".

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain
ASCII without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML
or XML using a publicly available DTD, and standard-conforming simple
HTML, PostScript or PDF designed for human modification.  Examples of
transparent image formats include PNG, XCF and JPG.  Opaque formats
include proprietary formats that can be read and edited only by
proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which the DTD and/or
processing tools are not generally available, and the
machine-generated HTML, PostScript or PDF produced by some word
processors for output purposes only.

The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself,
plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material
this License requires to appear in the title page.  For works in
formats which do not have any title page as such, "Title Page" means
the text near the most prominent appearance of the work's title,
preceding the beginning of the body of the text.

A section "Entitled XYZ" means a named subunit of the Document whose
title either is precisely XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses following
text that translates XYZ in another language.  (Here XYZ stands for a
specific section name mentioned below, such as "Acknowledgements",
"Dedications", "Endorsements", or "History".)  To "Preserve the Title"
of such a section when you modify the Document means that it remains a
section "Entitled XYZ" according to this definition.

The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice which
states that this License applies to the Document.  These Warranty
Disclaimers are considered to be included by reference in this
License, but only as regards disclaiming warranties: any other
implication that these Warranty Disclaimers may have is void and has
no effect on the meaning of this License.


2. VERBATIM COPYING

You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License applies
to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no other
conditions whatsoever to those of this License.  You may not use
technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further
copying of the copies you make or distribute.  However, you may accept
compensation in exchange for copies.  If you distribute a large enough
number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and
you may publicly display copies.


3. COPYING IN QUANTITY

If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly have
printed covers) of the Document, numbering more than 100, and the
Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose the
copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover
Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on
the back cover.  Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify
you as the publisher of these copies.  The front cover must present
the full title with all words of the title equally prominent and
visible.  You may add other material on the covers in addition.
Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve
the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated
as verbatim copying in other respects.

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit
legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit
reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent
pages.

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering
more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent
copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy
a computer-network location from which the general network-using
public has access to download using public-standard network protocols
a complete Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material.
If you use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps,
when you begin distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure
that this Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated
location until at least one year after the last time you distribute an
Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that
edition to the public.

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the
Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give
them a chance to provide you with an updated version of the Document.


4. MODIFICATIONS

You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under
the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release
the Modified Version under precisely this License, with the Modified
Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution
and modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy
of it.  In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:

A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct
   from that of the Document, and from those of previous versions
   (which should, if there were any, be listed in the History section
   of the Document).  You may use the same title as a previous version
   if the original publisher of that version gives permission.
B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
   responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified
   Version, together with at least five of the principal authors of the
   Document (all of its principal authors, if it has fewer than five),
   unless they release you from this requirement.
C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the
   Modified Version, as the publisher.
D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications
   adjacent to the other copyright notices.
F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice
   giving the public permission to use the Modified Version under the
   terms of this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.
G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections
   and required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.
H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.
I. Preserve the section Entitled "History", Preserve its Title, and add
   to it an item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and
   publisher of the Modified Version as given on the Title Page.  If
   there is no section Entitled "History" in the Document, create one
   stating the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document as
   given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified
   Version as stated in the previous sentence.
J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for
   public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise
   the network locations given in the Document for previous versions
   it was based on.  These may be placed in the "History" section.
   You may omit a network location for a work that was published at
   least four years before the Document itself, or if the original
   publisher of the version it refers to gives permission.
K. For any section Entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications",
   Preserve the Title of the section, and preserve in the section all
   the substance and tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements
   and/or dedications given therein.
L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document,
   unaltered in their text and in their titles.  Section numbers
   or the equivalent are not considered part of the section titles.
M. Delete any section Entitled "Endorsements".  Such a section
   may not be included in the Modified Version.
N. Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled "Endorsements"
   or to conflict in title with any Invariant Section.
O. Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.

If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or
appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material
copied from the Document, you may at your option designate some or all
of these sections as invariant.  To do this, add their titles to the
list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version's license notice.
These titles must be distinct from any other section titles.

You may add a section Entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains
nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various
parties--for example, statements of peer review or that the text has
been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a
standard.

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a
passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list
of Cover Texts in the Modified Version.  Only one passage of
Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or
through arrangements made by) any one entity.  If the Document already
includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by you or
by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of,
you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit
permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License
give permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or
imply endorsement of any Modified Version.


5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS

You may combine the Document with other documents released under this
License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified
versions, provided that you include in the combination all of the
Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and
list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its
license notice, and that you preserve all their Warranty Disclaimers.

The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
copy.  If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but
different contents, make the title of each such section unique by
adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original
author or publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number.
Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of
Invariant Sections in the license notice of the combined work.

In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled "History"
in the various original documents, forming one section Entitled
"History"; likewise combine any sections Entitled "Acknowledgements",
and any sections Entitled "Dedications".  You must delete all sections
Entitled "Endorsements".


6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this
License in the various documents with a single copy that is included in
the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for
verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other respects.

You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute
it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this
License into the extracted document, and follow this License in all
other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document.


7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS

A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate
and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or
distribution medium, is called an "aggregate" if the copyright
resulting from the compilation is not used to limit the legal rights
of the compilation's users beyond what the individual works permit.
When the Document is included in an aggregate, this License does not
apply to the other works in the aggregate which are not themselves
derivative works of the Document.

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these
copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than one half of
the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on
covers that bracket the Document within the aggregate, or the
electronic equivalent of covers if the Document is in electronic form.
Otherwise they must appear on printed covers that bracket the whole
aggregate.


8. TRANSLATION

Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may
distribute translations of the Document under the terms of section 4.
Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special
permission from their copyright holders, but you may include
translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the
original versions of these Invariant Sections.  You may include a
translation of this License, and all the license notices in the
Document, and any Warranty Disclaimers, provided that you also include
the original English version of this License and the original versions
of those notices and disclaimers.  In case of a disagreement between
the translation and the original version of this License or a notice
or disclaimer, the original version will prevail.

If a section in the Document is Entitled "Acknowledgements",
"Dedications", or "History", the requirement (section 4) to Preserve
its Title (section 1) will typically require changing the actual
title.


9. TERMINATION

You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except
as expressly provided for under this License.  Any other attempt to
copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Document is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License.  However,
parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this
License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
parties remain in full compliance.


10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE

The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions
of the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time.  Such new
versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.  See
http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number.
If the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this
License "or any later version" applies to it, you have the option of
following the terms and conditions either of that specified version or
of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by the
Free Software Foundation.  If the Document does not specify a version
number of this License, you may choose any version ever published (not
as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.


ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents

To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of
the License in the document and put the following copyright and
license notices just after the title page:

    Copyright (c)  YEAR  YOUR NAME.
    Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
    under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2
    or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
    with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
    A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
    Free Documentation License".

If you have Invariant Sections, Front-Cover Texts and Back-Cover Texts,
replace the "with...Texts." line with this:

    with the Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with the
    Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and with the Back-Cover Texts being LIST.

If you have Invariant Sections without Cover Texts, or some other
combination of the three, merge those two alternatives to suit the
situation.

If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we
recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of
free software license, such as the GNU General Public License,
to permit their use in free software.</literallayout>
</section>
<section id="_gnu_general_public_license_gpl">
<title>GNU General Public License (GPL)</title>
<literallayout class="monospaced">                    GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
                       Version 2, June 1991

 Copyright (C) 1989, 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA
 Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
 of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

                            Preamble

  The licenses for most software are designed to take away your
freedom to share and change it.  By contrast, the GNU General Public
License is intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free
software--to make sure the software is free for all its users.  This
General Public License applies to most of the Free Software
Foundation's software and to any other program whose authors commit to
using it.  (Some other Free Software Foundation software is covered by
the GNU Lesser General Public License instead.)  You can apply it to
your programs, too.

  When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not
price.  Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you
have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for
this service if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it
if you want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it
in new free programs; and that you know you can do these things.

  To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid
anyone to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights.
These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if you
distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it.

  For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether
gratis or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that
you have.  You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the
source code.  And you must show them these terms so they know their
rights.

  We protect your rights with two steps: (1) copyright the software, and
(2) offer you this license which gives you legal permission to copy,
distribute and/or modify the software.

  Also, for each author's protection and ours, we want to make certain
that everyone understands that there is no warranty for this free
software.  If the software is modified by someone else and passed on, we
want its recipients to know that what they have is not the original, so
that any problems introduced by others will not reflect on the original
authors' reputations.

  Finally, any free program is threatened constantly by software
patents.  We wish to avoid the danger that redistributors of a free
program will individually obtain patent licenses, in effect making the
program proprietary.  To prevent this, we have made it clear that any
patent must be licensed for everyone's free use or not licensed at all.

  The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow.

                    GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
   TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION

  0. This License applies to any program or other work which contains
a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it may be distributed
under the terms of this General Public License.  The "Program", below,
refers to any such program or work, and a "work based on the Program"
means either the Program or any derivative work under copyright law:
that is to say, a work containing the Program or a portion of it,
either verbatim or with modifications and/or translated into another
language.  (Hereinafter, translation is included without limitation in
the term "modification".)  Each licensee is addressed as "you".

Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not
covered by this License; they are outside its scope.  The act of
running the Program is not restricted, and the output from the Program
is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the
Program (independent of having been made by running the Program).
Whether that is true depends on what the Program does.

  1. You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Program's
source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you
conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate
copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the
notices that refer to this License and to the absence of any warranty;
and give any other recipients of the Program a copy of this License
along with the Program.

You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and
you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for a fee.

  2. You may modify your copy or copies of the Program or any portion
of it, thus forming a work based on the Program, and copy and
distribute such modifications or work under the terms of Section 1
above, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:

    a) You must cause the modified files to carry prominent notices
    stating that you changed the files and the date of any change.

    b) You must cause any work that you distribute or publish, that in
    whole or in part contains or is derived from the Program or any
    part thereof, to be licensed as a whole at no charge to all third
    parties under the terms of this License.

    c) If the modified program normally reads commands interactively
    when run, you must cause it, when started running for such
    interactive use in the most ordinary way, to print or display an
    announcement including an appropriate copyright notice and a
    notice that there is no warranty (or else, saying that you provide
    a warranty) and that users may redistribute the program under
    these conditions, and telling the user how to view a copy of this
    License.  (Exception: if the Program itself is interactive but
    does not normally print such an announcement, your work based on
    the Program is not required to print an announcement.)

These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole.  If
identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Program,
and can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in
themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those
sections when you distribute them as separate works.  But when you
distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work based
on the Program, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of
this License, whose permissions for other licensees extend to the
entire whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of who wrote it.

Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest
your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the intent is to
exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative or
collective works based on the Program.

In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Program
with the Program (or with a work based on the Program) on a volume of
a storage or distribution medium does not bring the other work under
the scope of this License.

  3. You may copy and distribute the Program (or a work based on it,
under Section 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of
Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you also do one of the following:

    a) Accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable
    source code, which must be distributed under the terms of Sections
    1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software interchange; or,

    b) Accompany it with a written offer, valid for at least three
    years, to give any third party, for a charge no more than your
    cost of physically performing source distribution, a complete
    machine-readable copy of the corresponding source code, to be
    distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium
    customarily used for software interchange; or,

    c) Accompany it with the information you received as to the offer
    to distribute corresponding source code.  (This alternative is
    allowed only for noncommercial distribution and only if you
    received the program in object code or executable form with such
    an offer, in accord with Subsection b above.)

The source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for
making modifications to it.  For an executable work, complete source
code means all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any
associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to
control compilation and installation of the executable.  However, as a
special exception, the source code distributed need not include
anything that is normally distributed (in either source or binary
form) with the major components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the
operating system on which the executable runs, unless that component
itself accompanies the executable.

If distribution of executable or object code is made by offering
access to copy from a designated place, then offering equivalent
access to copy the source code from the same place counts as
distribution of the source code, even though third parties are not
compelled to copy the source along with the object code.

  4. You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Program
except as expressly provided under this License.  Any attempt
otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Program is
void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License.
However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under
this License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
parties remain in full compliance.

  5. You are not required to accept this License, since you have not
signed it.  However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or
distribute the Program or its derivative works.  These actions are
prohibited by law if you do not accept this License.  Therefore, by
modifying or distributing the Program (or any work based on the
Program), you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so, and
all its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying
the Program or works based on it.

  6. Each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based on the
Program), the recipient automatically receives a license from the
original licensor to copy, distribute or modify the Program subject to
these terms and conditions.  You may not impose any further
restrictions on the recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein.
You are not responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties to
this License.

  7. If, as a consequence of a court judgment or allegation of patent
infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent issues),
conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or
otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not
excuse you from the conditions of this License.  If you cannot
distribute so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this
License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you
may not distribute the Program at all.  For example, if a patent
license would not permit royalty-free redistribution of the Program by
all those who receive copies directly or indirectly through you, then
the only way you could satisfy both it and this License would be to
refrain entirely from distribution of the Program.

If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under
any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is intended to
apply and the section as a whole is intended to apply in other
circumstances.

It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any
patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any
such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the
integrity of the free software distribution system, which is
implemented by public license practices.  Many people have made
generous contributions to the wide range of software distributed
through that system in reliance on consistent application of that
system; it is up to the author/donor to decide if he or she is willing
to distribute software through any other system and a licensee cannot
impose that choice.

This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to
be a consequence of the rest of this License.

  8. If the distribution and/or use of the Program is restricted in
certain countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces, the
original copyright holder who places the Program under this License
may add an explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding
those countries, so that distribution is permitted only in or among
countries not thus excluded.  In such case, this License incorporates
the limitation as if written in the body of this License.

  9. The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions
of the General Public License from time to time.  Such new versions will
be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to
address new problems or concerns.

Each version is given a distinguishing version number.  If the Program
specifies a version number of this License which applies to it and "any
later version", you have the option of following the terms and conditions
either of that version or of any later version published by the Free
Software Foundation.  If the Program does not specify a version number of
this License, you may choose any version ever published by the Free Software
Foundation.

  10. If you wish to incorporate parts of the Program into other free
programs whose distribution conditions are different, write to the author
to ask for permission.  For software which is copyrighted by the Free
Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we sometimes
make exceptions for this.  Our decision will be guided by the two goals
of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free software and
of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally.

                            NO WARRANTY

  11. BECAUSE THE PROGRAM IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO WARRANTY
FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW.  EXCEPT WHEN
OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES
PROVIDE THE PROGRAM "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE RISK AS
TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU.  SHOULD THE
PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING,
REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

  12. IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING
WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY AND/OR
REDISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES,
INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING
OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY
YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER
PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

                     END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS

            How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs

  If you develop a new program, and you want it to be of the greatest
possible use to the public, the best way to achieve this is to make it
free software which everyone can redistribute and change under these terms.

  To do so, attach the following notices to the program.  It is safest
to attach them to the start of each source file to most effectively
convey the exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at least
the "copyright" line and a pointer to where the full notice is found.

    &lt;one line to give the program's name and a brief idea of what it does.&gt;
    Copyright (C) &lt;year&gt;  &lt;name of author&gt;

    This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
    the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
    (at your option) any later version.

    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
    GNU General Public License for more details.

    You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
    with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
    51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.

Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper mail.

If the program is interactive, make it output a short notice like this
when it starts in an interactive mode:

    Gnomovision version 69, Copyright (C) year name of author
    Gnomovision comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; for details type `show w'.
    This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it
    under certain conditions; type `show c' for details.

The hypothetical commands `show w' and `show c' should show the appropriate
parts of the General Public License.  Of course, the commands you use may
be called something other than `show w' and `show c'; they could even be
mouse-clicks or menu items--whatever suits your program.

You should also get your employer (if you work as a programmer) or your
school, if any, to sign a "copyright disclaimer" for the program, if
necessary.  Here is a sample; alter the names:

  Yoyodyne, Inc., hereby disclaims all copyright interest in the program
  `Gnomovision' (which makes passes at compilers) written by James Hacker.

  &lt;signature of Ty Coon&gt;, 1 April 1989
  Ty Coon, President of Vice

This General Public License does not permit incorporating your program into
proprietary programs.  If your program is a subroutine library, you may
consider it more useful to permit linking proprietary applications with the
library.  If this is what you want to do, use the GNU Lesser General
Public License instead of this License.</literallayout>
</section>
</chapter>
</book>
